README.md, before:

# hcai-mini

hcai-mini is a compact edge-ready control plane for smart data centers. It ingests telemetry, forecasts thermal/power states, detects anomalies, and issues safe control actions to CRACs, PDUs, and gateways. Everything runs in two lightweight containers (`hcai-mini` for AI+UI, `hcai-edge` for field I/O) so you can deploy with a single command on an edge server.

## Where hcai-mini works best

- Smart data centers or edge POPs with a management VLAN that reaches CRACs/CRAHs, PDUs, rack sensors, and gateways.
- Sites that already expose MQTT/Modbus/BACnet/SNMP and want an autonomous controller with audit + operator approvals.
- Edge servers (Ubuntu 22.04/24.04, 4+ cores, 16 GB RAM, 50 GB SSD) where you can run Docker containers close to the hardware.

## What the platform does

- **Ingest**: Subscribes to MQTT telemetry streams (`site/<site>/rack/<rack>/telemetry`) plus device status topics.
- **Forecast**: Runs a baseline forecaster (swap in TFT/N-BEATS later) for near-term thermal and power predictions with confidence bands.
- **Detect anomalies**: Uses a rolling-window VAE-style scorer to tag abnormal behavior.
- **Act safely**: MPC-inspired controller proposes setpoints, clamps them with policy limits, publishes to control topics, and records audits.
- **Visualize + approve**: FastAPI UI with live tiles, actions, audit trail, and the network discovery workflow with approval gates.

## Architecture at a glance

```
┌──────────────┐      MQTT topics      ┌──────────────┐
│  Sensors &   │  ───────────────────▶ │  hcai-mini   │
│  Controllers │ ⟵ proposals / cmds ───│  (FastAPI)   │
└──────────────┘      receipts         │- ingest/AI/UI│
           ▲                            └─────┬────────┘
           │ discovery results                │
           │                                   ▼
      ┌────┴──────────┐  device writes   ┌──────────────┐
      │  hcai-edge    │ ───────────────▶ │  CRAC / PDU  │
      │ MQTT bridge + │ ◀─────────────── │  gateways    │
      │ Modbus/BACnet │   receipts       └──────────────┘
      └───────────────┘
```

## Step-by-step deployment (clean Ubuntu 22.04/24.04)

1. **Clone the repo.**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/visezion/hcai-mini.git /opt/hcai-mini
   cd /opt/hcai-mini
   ```
2. **Run the automated setup (installs Docker Engine, Compose, Mosquitto, make, nmap, etc.).**
   ```bash
   sudo ./scripts/setup.sh
   ```
3. **Reload your shell so the docker group membership applies.**
   ```bash
   newgrp docker
   ```
4. **Start the stack.**
   ```bash
   make up
   ```
5. **Verify.**
   ```bash
   docker compose ps
   curl http://localhost:8080/health
   ```
6. **Browse the UI.** Visit `http://<server>:8080/ui` from a workstation on the management network.

The `scripts/setup.sh` installer is idempotent; rerun it whenever you build a new node and it will ensure every dependency (Docker Engine, Compose plugin, Mosquitto broker, system packages) is present and enabled as a service.

## Keeping your deployment up to date

1. Pull the latest code:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/hcai-mini
   git fetch origin
   git checkout main
   git pull origin main
   ```
2. Rebuild and restart the containers so changes take effect:
   ```bash
   make down
   docker compose build hcai-mini hcai-edge
   make up
   ```
3. Validate:
   ```bash
   docker compose ps
   curl http://localhost:8080/health
   ```
4. Review release notes/commits for config changes; if new fields were added to `config/policy.yaml` or `config/devices.yaml`, merge them into your site-specific copies before restarting.

For fully automated updates, wrap the commands above in a cron job or CI workflow and run them during a maintenance window.

## Step-by-step (local development)

1. Launch the API service:
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   uvicorn app.api:app --reload --port 8080
   ```
2. In another terminal, run the edge bridge against your dev broker:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements-edge.txt
   python -m edge.bridge
   ```
3. Open `http://localhost:8080/ui` to see telemetry tiles update in real time.

## Using the platform

1. **Open the dashboard + stream telemetry.** Browse to `http://<host>:8080/ui`, pick Light/Dark from the toggle (light is default), then publish sample telemetry if needed:
   ```bash
   mosquitto_pub -h localhost -t site/dc1/rack/R12/telemetry -m '{
     "ts":"2025-11-11T06:00:00Z","site":"dc1","rack":"R12",
     "metrics":{"temp_c":29.3,"hum_pct":42.1,"power_kw":3.8,"airflow_cfm":165}
   }'
   ```
   Tiles and the ingest summary card update instantly; data is persisted in SQLite (`data/hcai.sqlite`).

2. **Discover new devices.**
   - Go to **Network Discovery** in the UI, enter a subnet (e.g., `10.0.0.0/24`), click **Discover Devices**.
   - The status chip shows *Scanning...* while hcai-edge probes for Modbus/BACnet/SNMP listeners and times out if the bridge is unreachable.
   - Approve any found devices; hcai-mini appends them to `config/devices.yaml` (never automatic).

3. **Approve or observe control actions.**
   - In *propose* mode, the controller writes to `ctrl/proposals`; operators can inspect payloads and decide when to switch to `auto_safe`.
   - Receipts from hcai-edge are stored under the **Actions** view and in the `receipts` table for audit.

4. **Monitor health.**
   - `/health` reports service status.
   - `make logs` tails both containers.
   - Prometheus metrics live at `/metrics` (discover counters, duration histogram, etc.).

5. **Review device inventory.**
   - The **Device inventory** panel in the UI lists every entry from `config/devices.yaml` (including items approved via auto-discovery) so you always know what the AI can control.
   - After approving a discovered device, the list refreshes automatically—no need to restart the stack.
   - The new **Setup** tab lets operators import discovered devices, validate connectivity, and inspect templates before approving.
   - You can also remove a device via the **Remove** button; hcai-edge drops the poller immediately so you can re-approve it for testing.

6. **Operate the AI controller.**
   - The **Monitor** tab shows live rack telemetry plus historical trends and forecast context.
   - The **Devices** tab (new) lists every device with its latest measured values, even if it doesn’t map neatly to a rack, so you can monitor gateways or sensors directly.
   - The **Actions** tab exposes every MPC proposal with inline explanations; switch the global toggle to require manual approval or let hcai-mini run autonomously.

## Repo layout

```
app/            FastAPI service, models, policy, storage, UI assets
edge/           Field bridge with Modbus writers and discovery helpers
config/         Policy and device inventory
docker/         Dockerfiles for both services
docker-compose.yml  One-command deployment
scripts/setup.sh     Zero-touch dependency installer
```

## Docker deployment cheatsheet

```bash
make up      # build + start hcai-mini and hcai-edge
make logs    # follow service logs
make down    # stop services
```

Set environment variables (MQTT_URL, credentials, MODE, etc.) in `docker-compose.yml` or via an `.env` file to point at your site broker/devices.

Discovery scans can take up to several minutes on large subnets. Adjust `DISCOVERY_TIMEOUT_S` (default 180 seconds) in the hcai-mini container to control how long the UI waits before flagging a timeout.

## Network discovery guardrails

- Discovery never edits `devices.yaml` without operator approval.
- Limits, rate-of-change, and watchdogs are enforced before any command is sent.
- All control events write to SQLite (`/data/hcai.sqlite`) for audits and receipts.

## Auto network discovery (“auto-can”)

hcai-mini now includes an end-to-end automatic onboarding workflow:

1. **Automatic subnet scanning** – hcai-edge probes every host in `DISCOVERY_SUBNET`, rate-limited by `DISCOVERY_IPS_PER_MIN`, and reports raw hits to `discover/raw`.
2. **Protocol fingerprinting** – Modbus device IDs, SNMP `sysObjectID`, BACnet Who-Is, and MQTT handshake detection classify each IP.
3. **Template matching** – fingerprints are matched against `/config/templates/*.yaml`; the resulting template provides the correct map/write policy.
4. **Structured MQTT results** – summarized devices are published to `discover/results` for FastAPI + UI consumption.
5. **Operator approvals** – `/discover/approve` persists a device, emits `discover/approved`, updates audits, and updates the Device Inventory instantly.
6. **Dynamic runtime registration** – hcai-edge reloads devices on the fly (no restart) and runs a read-only self-check before allowing writes.
7. **Continuous background scans** – scheduler triggers discovery every `DISCOVERY_INTERVAL_HOURS` (default 6h) so new hardware is never missed.
8. **Safety controls** – read-only probes, rate limiting, `DISCOVERY_ENABLED` master toggle, and `/data/discovery.log` keep scans safe and traceable.
9. **UI integration** – the Network Discovery panel shows status chips, subnet picker, history log, candidate list, and Approve buttons with instant feedback.
10. **Audit + metrics** – every scan/approval is stored in the `audits` table; Prometheus counters (`discover_*`) expose performance in `/metrics`.
11. **Template registry** – drop new YAML templates under `config/templates/` to teach hcai-mini about additional vendors/models.
12. **Device inventory & telemetry** – approved devices appear immediately in the dashboard, `/devices` API, and the edge bridge’s runtime registry.
13. **Automatic polling** – hcai-edge polls Modbus registers or SNMP OIDs defined in each template (default every 10 seconds) and publishes the readings to `site/<site>/rack/<rack>/telemetry`, keeping the Monitor page and AI models up to date without extra agents.

Key environment toggles: `DISCOVERY_SUBNET`, `DISCOVERY_IPS_PER_MIN`, `DISCOVERY_SNMP_COMMUNITY`, `DISCOVERY_TEMPLATE_DIR`, `DISCOVERY_INTERVAL_HOURS`, and `DISCOVERY_ENABLED`.

## Next steps

- Replace placeholder models with trained TFT + ConvVAE exports stored under `/data/models`.
- Extend `edge/discover.py` to include BACnet Who-Is and SNMP sysObjectID fingerprinting.
- Integrate HMAC signing between hcai-mini and hcai-edge for command authenticity.
- Add Grafana/Influx or Prometheus scraping for long-term observability.
- **Contribute changes**:
  ```bash
  git checkout -b feature/<short-name>
  # edit files, run tests
  git status
  git commit -am "feat: short description"
  git push origin feature/<short-name>
  ```
  Then open a pull request in [github.com/visezion/hcai-mini](https://github.com/visezion/hcai-mini) so the new functionality can be reviewed and merged.

Commit message:

Add simulator and GUI demo for hcai-mini
Introduces a simulator service with Docker support, a React-based simulator dashboard, and API endpoints for scenario control. Updates documentation and requirements, adds scenario controls to the UI, and provides mock telemetry for safe demonstration without hardware.

README.md, after:

# hcai-mini

hcai-mini is a compact edge-ready control plane for smart data centers. It ingests telemetry, forecasts thermal/power states, detects anomalies, and issues safe control actions to CRACs, PDUs, and gateways. Everything runs in two lightweight containers (`hcai-mini` for AI+UI, `hcai-edge` for field I/O) so you can deploy with a single command on an edge server.

## Where hcai-mini works best

- Smart data centers or edge POPs with a management VLAN that reaches CRACs/CRAHs, PDUs, rack sensors, and gateways.
- Sites that already expose MQTT/Modbus/BACnet/SNMP and want an autonomous controller with audit + operator approvals.
- Edge servers (Ubuntu 22.04/24.04, 4+ cores, 16 GB RAM, 50 GB SSD) where you can run Docker containers close to the hardware.

## What the platform does

- **Ingest**: Subscribes to MQTT telemetry streams (`site/<site>/rack/<rack>/telemetry`) plus device status topics.
- **Forecast**: Runs a baseline forecaster (swap in TFT/N-BEATS later) for near-term thermal and power predictions with confidence bands.
- **Detect anomalies**: Uses a rolling-window VAE-style scorer to tag abnormal behavior.
- **Act safely**: MPC-inspired controller proposes setpoints, clamps them with policy limits, publishes to control topics, and records audits.
- **Visualize + approve**: FastAPI UI with live tiles, actions, audit trail, and the network discovery workflow with approval gates.

## Architecture at a glance

```
┌──────────────┐      MQTT topics      ┌──────────────┐
│  Sensors &   │  ───────────────────▶ │  hcai-mini   │
│  Controllers │ ⟵ proposals / cmds ───│  (FastAPI)   │
└──────────────┘      receipts         │- ingest/AI/UI│
           ▲                            └─────┬────────┘
           │ discovery results                │
           │                                   ▼
      ┌────┴──────────┐  device writes   ┌──────────────┐
      │  hcai-edge    │ ───────────────▶ │  CRAC / PDU  │
      │ MQTT bridge + │ ◀─────────────── │  gateways    │
      │ Modbus/BACnet │   receipts       └──────────────┘
      └───────────────┘
```

## Step-by-step deployment (clean Ubuntu 22.04/24.04)

1. **Clone the repo.**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/visezion/hcai-mini.git /opt/hcai-mini
   cd /opt/hcai-mini
   ```
2. **Run the automated setup (installs Docker Engine, Compose, Mosquitto, make, nmap, etc.).**
   ```bash
   sudo ./scripts/setup.sh
   ```
3. **Reload your shell so the docker group membership applies.**
   ```bash
   newgrp docker
   ```
4. **Start the stack.**
   ```bash
   make up
   ```
5. **Verify.**
   ```bash
   docker compose ps
   curl http://localhost:8080/health
   ```
6. **Browse the UI.** Visit `http://<server>:8080/ui` from a workstation on the management network.

The `scripts/setup.sh` installer is idempotent; rerun it whenever you build a new node and it will ensure every dependency (Docker Engine, Compose plugin, Mosquitto broker, system packages) is present and enabled as a service.

## Simulator + GUI-only demo

Need to showcase hcai-mini without touching live hardware? Start the simulator container and open the dedicated React dashboard.

1. Launch the simulator alongside the main stack:
   ```bash
   docker compose up -d hcai-mini hcai-edge hcai-sim
   ```
2. Browse to `http://<server>:8080/ui/simulator.html`.
3. (Optional) Point the page at another controller by pasting its base URL in the top-right field and clicking **Apply**.
4. Use the four scenario tiles (temp spike, cooling failure, sensor dropout, power spike) to drive hcai-sim via `/simulator/scenarios`. The page streams stats, rack tiles, and device inventory via `/tiles`, `/telemetry/history`, and `/devices/summary`.
5. Flip scenarios off to return to steady state, or clear the input to preview the built-in mock data with no backend at all.

The simulator dashboard is built with plain React (ES modules) so you do not need a separate build step; the static assets live under `app/ui/simulator.*`. It is a safe way to demo the ingest → forecast → control loop with live charts, rack tiles, and scenario toggles driven entirely from the browser.

## Keeping your deployment up to date

1. Pull the latest code:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/hcai-mini
   git fetch origin
   git checkout main
   git pull origin main
   ```
2. Rebuild and restart the containers so changes take effect:
   ```bash
   make down
   docker compose build hcai-mini hcai-edge
   make up
   ```
3. Validate:
   ```bash
   docker compose ps
   curl http://localhost:8080/health
   ```
4. Review release notes/commits for config changes; if new fields were added to `config/policy.yaml` or `config/devices.yaml`, merge them into your site-specific copies before restarting.

For fully automated updates, wrap the commands above in a cron job or CI workflow and run them during a maintenance window.

## Step-by-step (local development)

1. Launch the API service:
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   uvicorn app.api:app --reload --port 8080
   ```
2. In another terminal, run the edge bridge against your dev broker:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements-edge.txt
   python -m edge.bridge
   ```
3. Open `http://localhost:8080/ui` to see telemetry tiles update in real time.

## Using the platform

1. **Open the dashboard + stream telemetry.** Browse to `http://<host>:8080/ui`, pick Light/Dark from the toggle (light is default), then publish sample telemetry if needed:
   ```bash
   mosquitto_pub -h localhost -t site/dc1/rack/R12/telemetry -m '{
     "ts":"2025-11-11T06:00:00Z","site":"dc1","rack":"R12",
     "metrics":{"temp_c":29.3,"hum_pct":42.1,"power_kw":3.8,"airflow_cfm":165}
   }'
   ```
   Tiles and the ingest summary card update instantly; data is persisted in SQLite (`data/hcai.sqlite`).

2. **Discover new devices.**
   - Go to **Network Discovery** in the UI, enter a subnet (e.g., `10.0.0.0/24`), click **Discover Devices**.
   - The status chip shows *Scanning...* while hcai-edge probes for Modbus/BACnet/SNMP listeners and times out if the bridge is unreachable.
   - Approve any found devices; hcai-mini appends them to `config/devices.yaml` (never automatic).

3. **Approve or observe control actions.**
   - In *propose* mode, the controller writes to `ctrl/proposals`; operators can inspect payloads and decide when to switch to `auto_safe`.
   - Receipts from hcai-edge are stored under the **Actions** view and in the `receipts` table for audit.

4. **Monitor health.**
   - `/health` reports service status.
   - `make logs` tails both containers.
   - Prometheus metrics live at `/metrics` (discover counters, duration histogram, etc.).

5. **Review device inventory.**
   - The **Device inventory** panel in the UI lists every entry from `config/devices.yaml` (including items approved via auto-discovery) so you always know what the AI can control.
   - After approving a discovered device, the list refreshes automatically—no need to restart the stack.
   - The new **Setup** tab lets operators import discovered devices, validate connectivity, and inspect templates before approving.
   - You can also remove a device via the **Remove** button; hcai-edge drops the poller immediately so you can re-approve it for testing.

6. **Operate the AI controller.**
   - The **Monitor** tab shows live rack telemetry plus historical trends and forecast context.
   - The **Devices** tab (new) lists every device with its latest measured values, even if it doesn’t map neatly to a rack, so you can monitor gateways or sensors directly.
   - The **Actions** tab exposes every MPC proposal with inline explanations; switch the global toggle to require manual approval or let hcai-mini run autonomously.

## Repo layout

```
app/            FastAPI service, models, policy, storage, UI assets
edge/           Field bridge with Modbus writers and discovery helpers
config/         Policy and device inventory
docker/         Dockerfiles for both services
docker-compose.yml  One-command deployment
scripts/setup.sh     Zero-touch dependency installer
```

## Docker deployment cheatsheet

```bash
make up      # build + start hcai-mini and hcai-edge
make logs    # follow service logs
make down    # stop services
```

Set environment variables (MQTT_URL, credentials, MODE, etc.) in `docker-compose.yml` or via an `.env` file to point at your site broker/devices.

Discovery scans can take up to several minutes on large subnets. Adjust `DISCOVERY_TIMEOUT_S` (default 180 seconds) in the hcai-mini container to control how long the UI waits before flagging a timeout.

## Network discovery guardrails

- Discovery never edits `devices.yaml` without operator approval.
- Limits, rate-of-change, and watchdogs are enforced before any command is sent.
- All control events write to SQLite (`/data/hcai.sqlite`) for audits and receipts.

## Auto network discovery (“auto-can”)

hcai-mini now includes an end-to-end automatic onboarding workflow:

1. **Automatic subnet scanning** – hcai-edge probes every host in `DISCOVERY_SUBNET`, rate-limited by `DISCOVERY_IPS_PER_MIN`, and reports raw hits to `discover/raw`.
2. **Protocol fingerprinting** – Modbus device IDs, SNMP `sysObjectID`, BACnet Who-Is, and MQTT handshake detection classify each IP.
3. **Template matching** – fingerprints are matched against `/config/templates/*.yaml`; the resulting template provides the correct map/write policy.
4. **Structured MQTT results** – summarized devices are published to `discover/results` for FastAPI + UI consumption.
5. **Operator approvals** – `/discover/approve` persists a device, emits `discover/approved`, updates audits, and updates the Device Inventory instantly.
6. **Dynamic runtime registration** – hcai-edge reloads devices on the fly (no restart) and runs a read-only self-check before allowing writes.
7. **Continuous background scans** – scheduler triggers discovery every `DISCOVERY_INTERVAL_HOURS` (default 6h) so new hardware is never missed.
8. **Safety controls** – read-only probes, rate limiting, `DISCOVERY_ENABLED` master toggle, and `/data/discovery.log` keep scans safe and traceable.
9. **UI integration** – the Network Discovery panel shows status chips, subnet picker, history log, candidate list, and Approve buttons with instant feedback.
10. **Audit + metrics** – every scan/approval is stored in the `audits` table; Prometheus counters (`discover_*`) expose performance in `/metrics`.
11. **Template registry** – drop new YAML templates under `config/templates/` to teach hcai-mini about additional vendors/models.
12. **Device inventory & telemetry** – approved devices appear immediately in the dashboard, `/devices` API, and the edge bridge’s runtime registry.
13. **Automatic polling** – hcai-edge polls Modbus registers or SNMP OIDs defined in each template (default every 10 seconds) and publishes the readings to `site/<site>/rack/<rack>/telemetry`, keeping the Monitor page and AI models up to date without extra agents.

Key environment toggles: `DISCOVERY_SUBNET`, `DISCOVERY_IPS_PER_MIN`, `DISCOVERY_SNMP_COMMUNITY`, `DISCOVERY_TEMPLATE_DIR`, `DISCOVERY_INTERVAL_HOURS`, and `DISCOVERY_ENABLED`.

## Next steps

- Replace placeholder models with trained TFT + ConvVAE exports stored under `/data/models`.
- Extend `edge/discover.py` to include BACnet Who-Is and SNMP sysObjectID fingerprinting.
- Integrate HMAC signing between hcai-mini and hcai-edge for command authenticity.
- Add Grafana/Influx or Prometheus scraping for long-term observability.
- **Contribute changes**:
  ```bash
  git checkout -b feature/<short-name>
  # edit files, run tests
  git status
  git commit -am "feat: short description"
  git push origin feature/<short-name>
  ```
  Then open a pull request in [github.com/visezion/hcai-mini](https://github.com/visezion/hcai-mini) so the new functionality can be reviewed and merged.
